Example of full THM coupling for an open wellbore (#2317)
GEOSX/GEOS: src/docs/sphinx/advancedExamples/validationStudies/wellboreProblems/thermoPoroElasticWellbore/Example.rst

.. _AdvancedExampleThermoPoroElasticWellbore:

####################################################
ThermoPoroElastic Wellbore Problem
####################################################

------------------------------------------------------------------
Problem description
------------------------------------------------------------------

> This example uses the thermal option of the ``SinglePhasePoromechanics`` solver to handle an open wellbore problem subjected to a uniform temperature change on its inner surface. Isotropic linear thermoporoelastic behavior is considered the rock formation around the wellbore. Plane strain and axissymetric conditions are assumed.

Author: done

.. _problemSketchThermoPoroElasticWellboreFig:
.. figure:: sketch.png
   :align: center
   :width: 500
   :figclass: align-center

   Sketch of a thermoporoelastic wellbore 

> Analytical solutions to this problem were first derived by `(Wang and Papamichos 1994) <https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/94WR01774>`__ using a one-way coupling simplification. They are also reformulated for the full coupling assumption in the book of `(Cheng 2016) <https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-319-25202-5>`__. These solutions will be considered to validate GEOSX results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Analytical solutions to this problem were first derived by `(Wang and Papamichos 1994) <https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/94WR01774>`__ using a one-way coupling simplification. They were then reformulated for the fully coupled assumption in the book of `(Cheng 2016) <https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-319-25202-5>`__. These solutions will be considered to validate GEOS results.
```

Reviewer: The official name of the code will change back to GEOS soon. Please update the rst file and legend field in python accordingly.

Author: This naming change will need be done everywhere, so I propose to make the change together with the whole code to keep it consistent.

**Input file**

This benchmark example uses no external input files and everything required is
contained within two GEOSX xml files that are located at:

.. code-block:: console

  inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml

and

.. code-block:: console

  inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_benchmark.xml

The corresponding integrated test is

.. code-block:: console

  inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_smoke.xml

-----------------------------------------------------------
Geometry and mesh
-----------------------------------------------------------

> The internal wellbore mesh generator ``InternalWellbore`` is employed to create the mesh of this wellbore problem. The radii of the open wellbore and the far-field boundary of the surrounding rock formation are defined by a vector ``radius``. In the tangent direction, ``theta`` angle is specified from 0 to 90 degrees to simulate the problem on a quarter of the wellbore geometry. The problem is under plane strain condition and therefore we only consider radial thermal diffusion on a single horizontal layer. The trajectory of the well is defined by ``trajectory``, which is vertical in this case. The ``autoSpaceRadialElems`` parameters allow for optimally increasing the element size from the wellbore to the far-field zone. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The internal wellbore mesh generator ``InternalWellbore`` is employed to create the mesh of this wellbore problem. The radii of the open wellbore and the far-field boundary of the surrounding rock formation are defined by a vector ``radius``. In the tangent direction, ``theta`` angle is specified from 0 to 90 degrees to simulate the problem on a quarter of the wellbore geometry. The problem is under plane strain condition and therefore we only consider thermal diffusion along radial direction within a single horizontal layer. The trajectory of the well is defined by ``trajectory``, which is vertical in this case. The ``autoSpaceRadialElems`` parameters allow for optimally increasing the element size from near wellbore to far-field zone. 
```

Author: done

 
.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_benchmark.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_WellboreMesh -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_WellboreMeshEnd -->

.. _meshThermoPoroElasticWellboreFig:
.. figure:: mesh.png
   :align: center
   :width: 500
   :figclass: align-center

   An optimized mesh for the open wellbore.

-----------------------------------------------------------
Material properties
-----------------------------------------------------------

> The bulk and shear drained elastic moduli of rock as well as its drained linear thermal expansion coefficient relating stress change to temperature change are defined within the ``Constitutive`` tag as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bulk and shear drained elastic moduli of rock as well as its drained linear thermal expansion coefficient relating stress change to temperature variation are defined within the ``Constitutive`` tag as follows:
```

Author: done

 
.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_ThermoElasticProperties -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_ThermoElasticPropertiesEnd -->

> Here the solid density is also defined but it is not used because the gravitational effect is ignored in this example. The porosity and the elastic bulk modulus :math:`K_{s}` of the solid skeleton are defined as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here the solid density is also defined, but it is not used as the gravitational effect is ignored in this example. The porosity and the elastic bulk modulus :math:`K_{s}` of the solid skeleton are defined as:
```

Author: done

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_PoroElasticProperties -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_PoroElasticPropertiesEnd -->

The thermal conductivities and the volumetric heat capacities of rock are defined by following XML blocks:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_ThermalProperties -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_ThermalPropertiesEnd -->

and

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_HeatCapacityProperties -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_HeatCapacityPropertiesEnd -->

The permeability of rock is defined by:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_PermeabilityProperties -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_PermeabilityPropertiesEnd -->

> Fluid properties such as viscosity, thermal expansion coefficient, etc. are defined by the XML block below. A negligible volumetric heat capacity is defined for fluid to ignore the thermal convection effect such that only thermal transfer via the diffusion phenomenon is considered.

Reviewer 2: The part about the volumetric heat capacity seems to come from the other tutorial, but I don't think you have a negligible heat capacity here based on your xml file, right?

> Fluid properties such as viscosity, thermal expansion coefficient, etc. are defined by the XML block below. A negligible volumetric heat capacity is defined for fluid to ignore the thermal convection effect such that only thermal transfer via the diffusion phenomenon is considered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fluid properties such as viscosity, thermal expansion coefficient, etc. are defined by the XML block below. A negligible volumetric heat capacity is defined for fluid to ignore the thermal convection effect. This way, only thermal transfer via the diffusion phenomenon is considered.
```

Author: done

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_FluidProperties -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_FluidPropertiesEnd -->

-----------------------------------------------------------
Boundary conditions
-----------------------------------------------------------

The mechanical boundary conditions are applied to ensure the axisymmetric plane strain conditions such as:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_PlaneStrainAxisymmetryBC -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_PlaneStrainAxisymmetryBCEnd -->

> Besides, the far-field boundary is assumed to be fixed because the local changes on the wellbore must have negligible effect on the far-field boundary. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Besides, the far-field boundary is assumed to be fixed because the local changes on the wellbore must have negligible effect on the far-field boundary in short term. 
```

Author: It is true that the far-field boundary must be theoretically at infinity. However, the far-field boundray was defined far enough in this example to cover also a reasonable long term problem. So I propose not to add `short term` here because this example is not limited to a short term problem.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_FixedFarFieldBC -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_FixedFarFieldBCEnd -->

The traction-free condition on the inner surface of the wellbore is defined by:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_ZeroInnerTractionBC -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_ZeroInnerTractionBCEnd -->

The initial temperature (that is also the far-field boundary temperature) and the temperature applied on the inner surface of the wellbore are defined as

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_TemperatureBC -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_TemperatureBCEnd -->

> It is important to remark that the initial stress of each layers must be set with accordance to the initial temperature: :math:`\sigma_{0} = 3K\alpha T_{0}` where :math:`\sigma_{0}` is the initial principal stress, :math:`T_{0}` is the initial temperature, :math:`K` is the drained bulk modulus and :math:`\alpha` is the drained linear thermal expansion coefficient of the materials. In this example, the initial stresses are set to zero because the initial temperature is set to zero (°C).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is important to remark that the initial effective stress of each layers must be set with accordance to the initial temperature: :math:`\sigma_{0} = 3K\alpha T_{0}` where :math:`\sigma_{0}` is the initial principal effective stress, :math:`T_{0}` is the initial temperature, :math:`K` is the drained bulk modulus and :math:`\alpha` is the drained linear thermal expansion coefficient of the materials. In this example, the initial effective stresses are set to zero because the initial temperature is set to zero degrees Kelvin.
```
Maybe just say that yes 0 K may seem to be a cold temperature, but `T` (and `p`) should be interpreted here as delta T and delta P with respect to an initial equilibrium.

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_StressCasingInit -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_StressCasingInitEnd -->

The initial and boundary conditions for pore pressure are defined in the block below:

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_PorePressureBC -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_PorePressureBCEnd -->

-----------------------------------------------------------
Collecting output data
-----------------------------------------------------------

> It is convenient to collect data in hdf5 format that can be easily post-processed using Python. To collect the temperature field for all the time steps, the following XML blocks need to be defined:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is convenient to collect data in hdf5 format that can be easily post-processed using Python. To collect the temperature field for all time steps, the following XML blocks need to be defined:
```

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_TemperatureCollection -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_TemperatureCollectionEnd -->

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_TemperatureTimeHistory -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_TemperatureTimeHistoryEnd -->

> Similarly, the following blocks are needed to collect the solid stress:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similarly, the following blocks are needed to collect the effective stresses across the domain:
```

Author: done

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_SolidStressCollection -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_SolidStressCollectionEnd -->

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_SolidStressTimeHistory -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_SolidStressTimeHistoryEnd -->

The displacement field can be collected using ``nodeManager`` as follows

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_DisplacementCollection -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_DisplacementCollectionEnd -->

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_base.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_DisplacementTimeHistory -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_DisplacementTimeHistoryEnd -->

> Also, periodic events are required to trigger the collection of this data on the mesh. For example, the periodic events for collecting the displacement field are defined as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, periodic events are required to trigger the collection of this data during the entire simulation. For example, the periodic events for collecting the displacement field are defined as:
```

Author: done

.. literalinclude:: ../../../../../../../inputFiles/wellbore/THM_wellbore_benchmark.xml
  :language: xml
  :start-after: <!-- SPHINX_DisplacementPeriodicEvent -->
  :end-before: <!-- SPHINX_DisplacementPeriodicEventEnd -->

---------------------------------
Results and benchmark
---------------------------------

> A good agreement between the GEOSX results and analytical results for temperature and pore pressure distribution around the wellbore is shown in the figures below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A good agreement between the GEOS results and analytical results for temperature and pore pressure distribution around the wellbore is shown in the figures below:
```

Author: see the comment above

> .. plot:: docs/sphinx/advancedExamples/validationStudies/wellboreProblems/THM_wellbore/THM_wellbore_temperature_pressure.py

Author: ```suggestion
.. plot:: docs/sphinx/advancedExamples/validationStudies/wellboreProblems/thermoPoroElasticWellbore/THM_wellbore_temperature_pressure.py
```

.. _problemThermoPoroElasticWellbore_Temperature_Pressure_Fig:
.. figure:: temperature_pressure.png
   :align: center
   :width: 800
   :figclass: align-center

> 

Reviewer: Please remove this redundant figure, which should be generated by python script.

Author: The plots require hdf5 data files that are too large such that I cannot push them to github. Therefore they must be done in local to create the figures that are actually displaced in the doc. The script are provided for local use only.

   Validation of temperature and pore pressure.

and the validation for the radial displacement around the cased wellbore is shown below:

> .. plot:: docs/sphinx/advancedExamples/validationStudies/wellboreProblems/THM_wellbore/THM_wellbore_displacement.py

Author: ```suggestion
.. plot:: docs/sphinx/advancedExamples/validationStudies/wellboreProblems/thermoPoroElasticWellbore/THM_wellbore_displacement.py
```

.. _problemThermoPoroElasticWellbore_Displacement_Fig:
.. figure:: displacement.png
   :align: center
   :width: 500
   :figclass: align-center

> 

Reviewer: see above

Author: see the comment above

   Validation of the radial displacement.

> The validations of the total radial and hoop stress (tangent stress) components computed by GEOSX against reference results are shown in the figure below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The validations of the total radial and hoop stress (tangent stress) components computed by GEOS against reference results are shown in the figure below:
```

Author: see the comment above

> .. plot:: docs/sphinx/advancedExamples/validationStudies/wellboreProblems/THM_wellbore/THM_wellbore_stress.py

Author: ```suggestion
.. plot:: docs/sphinx/advancedExamples/validationStudies/wellboreProblems/thermoPoroElasticWellbore/THM_wellbore_stress.py
```

.. _problemThermoPoroElasticWellbore_Stress_Fig:
.. figure:: stress.png
   :align: center
   :width: 800

>    :figclass: align-center

Reviewer: see above

Author: see the comment above
